_pages/books.md, before:

---
permalink: /books/
title: "The Codex Index"
last_modified_at: 2018-09-09
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

Here you can find a list of the (primarily) non-fiction books that I've read. If you're interested in the fiction books I've read, that is a much, much longer list and you should probably friend me on Goodreads. There are a few select fiction books I've included in the list, simply because I think they are very intelligent reads that are relevant to the content on this blog. I have been making an effort recently to read more non-fiction books, and I especially like listening to non-fiction audiobooks. So some of the books on this list I haven't actually read... I've listened to them! With the longer audiobooks, I'll often listen for a bit and then switch to a different book... so some of the books will stay on my "currently reading" list for a while. It just means I'm in the middle of it, and fully intend on finishing it at some point.

Note: the "What I've read" and "What I want to read" sections are still a work in progress.

## What I'm reading

"Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow" by Yuval Noah Harari
:     I'm listening to this book via Audible. I really enjoyed "Sapiens," and this books builds off of the last chapter in Sapiens to focus on what humanity will look like in the future, but with a reasoning strongly grounded in our history. Fascinating topic by one of my favorite modern philosophers.

"A History of Western Philosophy" by Bertrand Russell
:     I'm listening to this book via Audible... and I kid you not, it is 40 hours long. I'm currently paused somewhere near the beginning of the medieval philosophy section. I can say that the ancient philosophy section was very interesting, and I learned a lot, but I also definitely zoned out while listening to it. Someday I'd like to get a physical copy of this book and use it as a reference (as it's perfectly set up to be just that).

"The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution" by Francis Fukuyama
:     I'm listening to this book via Audible... and it is also on pause. It has some very interesting theories about how humans were able to form increasingly complex societies, despite being programmed to essentially live in communities no larger than 150 people. It's a study on the theoretical and philosophical foundations of politics, and the first in a duology on Political Order & Political Decay (the second one being on decay).

## What I've read

"Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind" by Yuval Noah Harari
:    I really loved this book. It presents a big picture history of the human race, from our origin of a species to our current state of technological progress. It looks at how we have always shaped our environment (by frequently genocidal means), how we learned to organize and store information, the fundamental unifying forces of human history... addressing most of the "big questions" in way that was both philosophically rigorous and interesting - because he told it as a story. This is one of the fundamental points that Harari makes at the beginning of the book: the reason that humans are the dominant species is because we can cooperate in large numbers, and the glue that allows us to cooperate on a massive scale is our capacity for storytelling.

"Too Like the Lightning" by Ada Palmer (Terra Ignota series)
:    One of the few fiction books/series I've included on this list, the Terra Ignota series is a fantastic work of narrative philosophy in the guise of science fiction. The author is a historian by profession, and write this book as a history, of revolutionary events set in the 25th century, from the perspective of an unreliable narrator, in the style of 18th century literature, with the "reader" as a character in conversation with the narrating character. The third book in the series, "The Will to Battle," adds philosopher Thomas Hobbes as a third character in the meta-conversation that occurs between the narrating character and the reader. If you are into political theory and science fiction, it doesn't get much better than this.

"Infomocracy" by Malka Ann Older (Centenal Cycle series)
:    The other fiction book/series I knew I needed to include in this list, "Infomocracy" is a vision of how global micro-democracies could develop during our information age, in the near future. Older is a humanitarian worker with over eight years of experience working in international aid & development, and her desire for a better global political system really comes through in her world-building. This is an author who knows the power of science fiction in influencing future leaders, and focuses on addressing political issues we will very likely face within the next few decades.

## What I want to read

"Smartcuts: How Hackers, Innovators, and Icons Accelerate Success" by Shane Snow
:    This is a book about lateral thinking, and how people can accomplish incredible things in a very short amount of time. This book tries to rethink success and provide techniques for doing things smarter and faster (by taking "smartcuts," not "shortcuts").

"Factfulness: Ten Reasons We're Wrong About the World – and Why Things Are Better Than You Think" by Hans Rosling
:    Bill Gates thinks this book is so important, [he's gifting it to all college graduates this year](https://www.businessinsider.com/bill-gates-giving-free-copies-factfulness-to-college-graduates-2018-6) (2018). Written by the late Hans Rosling, a Swedish doctor and statistician, this book was written to change the way people think about the world - by arming its readers with "a set of simple thinking tools." It makes the case that the world is in a better state than we think, and it is important to have an accurate view of the world in order to continue to improve it.

## Suggestions?

Leave a comment below!

Commit message:

added books to books page, enabled search and comments
trying comments with disqus

_pages/books.md, after:

---
permalink: /books/
title: "The Codex Index"
last_modified_at: 2018-09-12
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
comments: true
---

Here you can find a list of the (primarily) non-fiction books that I've read. If you're interested in the fiction books I've read, that is a much, much longer list and you should probably friend me on Goodreads. There are a few select fiction books I've included in the list, simply because I think they are very intelligent reads that are relevant to the content on this blog. I have been making an effort recently to read more non-fiction books, and I especially like listening to non-fiction audiobooks. So some of the books on this list I haven't actually read... I've listened to them! With the longer audiobooks, I'll often listen for a bit and then switch to a different book... so some of the books will stay on my "currently reading" list for a while. It just means I'm in the middle of it, and fully intend on finishing it at some point.

Note: the "What I've read" and "What I want to read" sections are still a work in progress.

## What I'm reading

"Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow" by Yuval Noah Harari
:     I'm listening to this book via Audible. I really enjoyed "Sapiens," and this books builds off of the last chapter in Sapiens to focus on what humanity will look like in the future, but with a reasoning strongly grounded in our history. Fascinating topic by one of my favorite modern philosophers.

"A History of Western Philosophy" by Bertrand Russell
:     I'm listening to this book via Audible... and I kid you not, it is 40 hours long. I'm currently paused somewhere near the beginning of the medieval philosophy section. I can say that the ancient philosophy section was very interesting, and I learned a lot, but I also definitely zoned out while listening to it. Someday I'd like to get a physical copy of this book and use it as a reference (as it's perfectly set up to be just that).

"The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution" by Francis Fukuyama
:     I'm listening to this book via Audible... and it is also on pause. It has some very interesting theories about how humans were able to form increasingly complex societies, despite being programmed to essentially live in communities no larger than 150 people. It's a study on the theoretical and philosophical foundations of politics, and the first in a duology on Political Order & Political Decay (the second one being on decay).

## What I've read

"Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind" by Yuval Noah Harari
:    I really loved this book. It presents a big picture history of the human race, from our origin of a species to our current state of technological progress. It looks at how we have always shaped our environment (by frequently genocidal means), how we learned to organize and store information, the fundamental unifying forces of human history... addressing most of the "big questions" in way that was both philosophically rigorous and interesting - because he told it as a story. This is one of the fundamental points that Harari makes at the beginning of the book: the reason that humans are the dominant species is because we can cooperate in large numbers, and the glue that allows us to cooperate on a massive scale is our capacity for storytelling.

"Freakonomics & Superfreakonomics" by Steven D. Levitt & Stephen J. Dubner
:    Written by an economist (Levitt) and a journalist (Dubner), these books are a series of interconnected essays about how behavioral economics and statistics are ingrained in the deepest parts of our personal, social, and political lives. They explore a wide variety of topics with their compelling combined skills of economic/statistical expertise and narrative storytelling. Listening to these books, I felt like I was constantly learning something new - and everything was all the more fascinating for being embedded in their chosen expert's personal story.

"Outliers: The Story of Success" by Malcolm Gladwell
:    This was a very interesting book that was essentially divided into two parts - the first part was about very successful individuals and their shared techniques for achieving that success (Gladwell's famous 10,000 hour rule). But the second part was even more interesting for me, and it was about how the social, economic, and political situations that individuals were in had a far greater influence on those individuals being successful than any actions that individual person took.

"Too Like the Lightning" by Ada Palmer (Terra Ignota series)
:    One of the few fiction books/series I've included on this list, the Terra Ignota series is a fantastic work of narrative philosophy in the guise of science fiction. The author is a historian by profession, and write this book as a history, of revolutionary events set in the 25th century, from the perspective of an unreliable narrator, in the style of 18th century literature, with the "reader" as a character in conversation with the narrating character. The third book in the series, "The Will to Battle," adds philosopher Thomas Hobbes as a third character in the meta-conversation that occurs between the narrating character and the reader. If you are into political theory and science fiction, it doesn't get much better than this.

"Infomocracy" by Malka Ann Older (Centenal Cycle series)
:    The other fiction book/series I knew I needed to include in this list, "Infomocracy" is a vision of how global micro-democracies could develop during our information age, in the near future. Older is a humanitarian worker with over eight years of experience working in international aid & development, and her desire for a better global political system really comes through in her world-building. This is an author who knows the power of science fiction in influencing future leaders, and focuses on addressing political issues we will very likely face within the next few decades.

## What I want to read

"Smartcuts: How Hackers, Innovators, and Icons Accelerate Success" by Shane Snow
:    This is a book about lateral thinking, and how people can accomplish incredible things in a very short amount of time. This book tries to rethink success and provide techniques for doing things smarter and faster (by taking "smartcuts," not "shortcuts").

"Factfulness: Ten Reasons We're Wrong About the World – and Why Things Are Better Than You Think" by Hans Rosling
:    Bill Gates thinks this book is so important, [he's gifting it to all college graduates this year](https://www.businessinsider.com/bill-gates-giving-free-copies-factfulness-to-college-graduates-2018-6) (2018). Written by the late Hans Rosling, a Swedish doctor and statistician, this book was written to change the way people think about the world - by arming its readers with "a set of simple thinking tools." It makes the case that the world is in a better state than we think, and it is important to have an accurate view of the world in order to continue to improve it.

"21 Lessons for the 21st Century" by Yuval Noah Harari
:    By the author of "Sapiens" and "Homo Deus," this book is a set of 21 essays about the most important issues facing humanity today. One of these essays is about how science fiction is today's most important artistic genre! After Sapiens and Homo Deus, I will read anything this man writes.

## Suggestions?

Leave a comment below!
