_pages/splash-page.md, before:

---
title: "Welcome..."
layout: splash
permalink: /
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.1"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/home_splash_malt.jpg
  cta_label: "Download my resume"
  cta_url:   "https://drive.google.com/open?id=1cIGer2UH0QU3paGD46R5iXc6uK3p0jJc"
  # caption:   "Photo credit: [**Unsplash**](https://unsplash.com)"
excerpt: "to my world of Digital Library Science."
intro:
  - excerpt: 'Follow me as I learn about library science, coding for libraries, data & digital asset management, and more.  
  <br/>
  This blog hosts my class notes, random thoughts, and serves as an archive of my experiences as I complete my MSLIS at UIUC.'
feature_row:
  - image_path: /assets/images/home_splash_blog.jpg
    alt: "typewriter"
    title: "My Blog"
    excerpt: "Read my latest content at the blog."
    url: "/blog/"
    btn_label: "Recent posts"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
  - image_path: /assets/images/home_splash_classes.jpg
    alt: "notebook"
    title: "Class Notes"
    excerpt: "Follow along and see what I'm learning!"
    url: "/class-notes/"
    btn_label: "My Classes"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
  - image_path: /assets/images/home_splash_books.jpg
    alt: "library hidden door"
    title: "Codex Index"
    excerpt: "See what I'm reading (and have read)."
    url: "/books/"
    btn_label: "My Books"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"

feature_row2:
  - image_path: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
    title: "Placeholder Image Left Aligned"
    excerpt: 'This is some sample content that goes here with **Markdown** formatting. Left aligned with `type="left"`'
    url: "#test-link"
    btn_label: "Read More"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
feature_row3:
  - image_path: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
    title: "Placeholder Image Right Aligned"
    excerpt: 'This is some sample content that goes here with **Markdown** formatting. Right aligned with `type="right"`'
    url: "#test-link"
    btn_label: "Read More"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
feature_row4:
  - image_path: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
    title: "Placeholder Image Center Aligned"
    excerpt: 'This is some sample content that goes here with **Markdown** formatting. Centered with `type="center"`'
    url: "#test-link"
    btn_label: "Read More"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
---

{% include feature_row id="intro" type="center" %}

{% include feature_row %}

<!--
{% include feature_row id="feature_row2" type="left" %}

{% include feature_row id="feature_row3" type="right" %}

{% include feature_row id="feature_row4" type="center" %}-->

Commit message:

got rid of classes on home page
and added projects placeholder

_pages/splash-page.md, after:

---
title: "Welcome..."
layout: splash
permalink: /
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.1"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/home_splash_malt.jpg
  cta_label: "See my resume"
  cta_url:   "https://drive.google.com/open?id=1cIGer2UH0QU3paGD46R5iXc6uK3p0jJc"
  # caption:   "Photo credit: [**Unsplash**](https://unsplash.com)"
excerpt: "to my world of Digital Library Science."
intro:
  - excerpt: "Follow me as I learn about library science, coding for libraries, data & digital asset management, and more. This blog serves as an archive of my experiences as I complete my MSLIS at UIUC. I write about what I'm learning in class, what I'm doing outside of class, books I'm reading, and random musings about the library world. I will also document my projects, so you can see what I've created and how I did it."
feature_row:
  - image_path: /assets/images/home_splash_blog.jpg
    alt: "typewriter"
    title: "My Blog"
    excerpt: "Read my latest content at the blog."
    url: "/blog/"
    btn_label: "Recent posts"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
  - image_path: /assets/images/home_splash_projects.jpg
    alt: "notebook"
    title: "Projects"
    excerpt: "Under construction"
    url: "/"
    btn_label: "My Projects"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
  - image_path: /assets/images/home_splash_books.jpg
    alt: "library hidden door"
    title: "Codex Index"
    excerpt: "See what I'm reading (and have read)."
    url: "/books/"
    btn_label: "My Books"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"

feature_row2:
  - image_path: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
    title: "Placeholder Image Left Aligned"
    excerpt: 'This is some sample content that goes here with **Markdown** formatting. Left aligned with `type="left"`'
    url: "#test-link"
    btn_label: "Read More"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
feature_row3:
  - image_path: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
    title: "Placeholder Image Right Aligned"
    excerpt: 'This is some sample content that goes here with **Markdown** formatting. Right aligned with `type="right"`'
    url: "#test-link"
    btn_label: "Read More"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
feature_row4:
  - image_path: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
    title: "Placeholder Image Center Aligned"
    excerpt: 'This is some sample content that goes here with **Markdown** formatting. Centered with `type="center"`'
    url: "#test-link"
    btn_label: "Read More"
    btn_class: "btn--primary"
---

{% include feature_row id="intro" type="center" %}

{% include feature_row %}

<!--
{% include feature_row id="feature_row2" type="left" %}

{% include feature_row id="feature_row3" type="right" %}

{% include feature_row id="feature_row4" type="center" %}-->
