_international-relations-database/irdb-home.md, before:

---
title: "IRDB Home"
permalink: /projects/irdb-home
excerpt: "Final project for IS490DB and IS452. Contains SQL scripts for creating a database of states, conflicts, and associated entities, as well as Python scripts for transforming .csv files from COW, ICOW, and Polity IV into SQL insert statements for the database."
header:
  image: /assets/images/project_irdbhome.jpg
  #teaser: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-1-th.jpg
sidebar:
  - title: Project Name
    text: "International Relations Database (IRDB)"
    #image:
  - title: "Description"
    text: "Final project for IS490DB and IS452. Contains SQL scripts for creating a database of states, conflicts, and associated entities, as well as Python scripts for transforming .csv files from COW, ICOW, and Polity IV into SQL insert statements for the database."
  - title: "Relevant Classes"
    text: "Fall 2018: [IS452](/tags/#is452), [IS490DB](/tags/#is490db)"
  - title: "Github Repo"
    text: "[international-relations-database](https://github.com/jenna-jordan/international-relations-database)"
gallery:
  - url: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-1.jpg
    image_path: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-1-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 1"
  - url: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2.jpg
    image_path: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
  - url: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-3.jpg
    image_path: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-3-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 3"
---

During my first semester, I am taking a [class on databases](/blog/my-classes-for-fall-2018#is490db-introduction-to-databases)  and a [class on python](/blog/my-classes-for-fall-2018#is452-foundations-of-information-processing). Both classes conclude with a final project of our own devising. I have merged those two final projects into one: creating the database and then loading it with the appropriate data.

For the database side of the project, I will write a SQL script to create a database that contains, connects, and describes the disparate datasets published by the [Correlates of War project](http://www.correlatesofwar.org/), the [Issue Correlates of War project](http://www.paulhensel.org/icow.html), and the [Polity IV project](http://www.systemicpeace.org/polityproject.html).

However, this only covers the creation of the tables and their referential integrity. The python side of the project will involve writing scripts to transform .csv files into SQL insert statements.

Together, both sides of the project will result in a Github project repo that contains the necessary scripts to allow anyone to create and fill the database on their own machine. I plan to incorporate proper attribution, metadata, and meaningful context drawn from the codebooks into the database, as well as include SQL scripts for example views that transform the complex database back into the tabular form political scientists are used to for analytical work.

<!--{% include gallery caption="This is a sample gallery." %}-->

Commit message:

update irdb project, add phase 1 page

_international-relations-database/irdb-home.md, after:

---
title: "IRDB Home"
permalink: /projects/irdb-home
excerpt: "This project assembles together various projects that collect data on international relations (i.e. Correlates of War, ICOW, Polity IV) into one cohesive relational database. The GitHub repo contains the database schema, the original CSV files, and python scripts for transforming those CSV files into tables for the database."
header:
  image: /assets/images/project_irdbhome.jpg
  #teaser: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-1-th.jpg
sidebar:
  - title: Project Name
    text: "International Relations Database (IRDB)"
    #image:
  - title: "Description"
    text: "This project assembles together various projects that collect data on international relations (i.e. Correlates of War, ICOW, Polity IV) into one cohesive relational database. The GitHub repo contains the database schema, the original CSV files, and python scripts for transforming those CSV files into tables for the database."
  - title: "Project Phases"
    text: "Fall 2018: [Phase 1](/projects/irdb-phase-1)"
  - title: "Github Repo"
    text: "[international-relations-database](https://github.com/jenna-jordan/international-relations-database)"
gallery:
  - url: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-1.jpg
    image_path: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-1-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 1"
  - url: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2.jpg
    image_path: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-2-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 2"
  - url: /assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-3.jpg
    image_path: assets/images/unsplash-gallery-image-3-th.jpg
    alt: "placeholder image 3"
---

Although I am going to school for Library and Information Science, the specific domain that I am interested in applying my digital information skills to is political science - in particular, international relations and conflict resolution. Many of the classes that I plan to take during my MSLIS conclude with open-ended final projects, in which you can apply the skills you have learned to the domain of your choice. My goal is to use these final projects to build a comprehensive and useful information tool for international relations scholars: an International Relations Database (IRDB).

During my first semester, I am taking a [class on databases](/blog/my-classes-for-fall-2018#is490db-introduction-to-databases)  and a [class on python](/blog/my-classes-for-fall-2018#is452-foundations-of-information-processing). Both classes conclude with a final project of our own devising. I have merged those two final projects into one: designing and creating the database itself, and then using python to load it with the appropriate data. For this first phase of the project, I am limiting myself to data from the [Correlates of War](http://www.correlatesofwar.org/) project. In the near future, I would like to expand it to also include data from the [Issue Correlates of War](http://www.paulhensel.org/icow.html) project, and the [Polity IV](http://www.systemicpeace.org/polityproject.html) project.

After completing the first phase of the IRDB, the Github project repo will contain the necessary scripts to allow anyone to create and fill the database on their own machine. I plan to incorporate proper attribution, metadata, and meaningful context drawn from the codebooks into the database, as well as include SQL scripts for example views that transform the complex database back into the tabular form political scientists are used to for analytical work.

<!--{% include gallery caption="This is a sample gallery." %}-->
