---
title: Readings for Week 1 - What is Data? Information? Knowledge?
published: False # True / False
toc: true

categories:
  - IS501
tags:
  - IS501
  - Library Science
  - Semester 1
  - Readings

# sidebar: # note: optional, but should include for class notes posts
#  title: # title of nav bar that shows in post
#  nav: # references specific sidebar laid out in _data/navigation.yml
---
## Bibliography

### Required Readings

[Sweeney, M. (2014). How to read for grad school.](http://miriamsweeney.net/2012/06/20/readforgradschool/)

[Bates, M. J. (2015). The information professions: knowledge, memory, heritage. Information Research 20(1), paper 655.](http://www.informationr.net/ir/20-1/paper655.html#.W4RS0JNKjOQ)  

[Buckland, M. K. (2017). Introduction. In Information and Society. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1-19.](https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_8286111)  (PAYWALLED)

[Buckland, M. K. (1997). What is a “document”? Journal of the American Society for Information Science 48(9): 804-809.](http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~buckland/whatdoc.html)

[Bush, V. (1945). As we may think. Atlantic Monthly.](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1945/07/as-we-may-think/303881/)

### Optional Readings (Short Videos)

[Memex animation - Vannevar Bush’s diagrams made real - YouTube](https://youtu.be/c539cK58ees)

[The Man Who Wanted to Classify the World](https://search.alexanderstreet.com/view/work/bibliographic_entity%7Cvideo_work%7C1784825)

## Summaries & Notes

### How to Read for Grad School (Sweeney 2014)

This is just helpful advice for the huge amount of reading that we will have to do for this class. It gives 4 pieces of advice for reading in a time-efficient manner.
{: .notice--primary}

- Read Strategically, Not Linearly
- Take notes while reading
- Be purposeful. Ask (and write down) questions that get to why you are reading this article.
- Have a critical perspective - question the author & their motivations.

### The Information Professions (Bates 2015)

This article defines what it means to be an "information professional," an especially important thing to define since everyone is now using information/data in a professional setting. Bates defines information science as a "metadiscipline" and clarifies that library science is just one aspect of the information science metadiscipline... which can range from humanities-focused "disciplines of cultural record" to science-focused "sciences of information."  
The various information professions, despite developing separately and having different names, have at the core a key service/function: to manage exosomatic (stored outside the body) information (both analog & digital), using various information technologies, & make that information available for all humanity.
{: .notice--primary}

-  Most academic disciplines are on a spectrum (i.e.  art -> literature -> history -> Econ -> Psych -> Biology -> Physics -> Math); but some cut across and apply to the whole spectrum but from a particular perspective… these are the metadisciplines: information science, communication/journalism, & education.
- There are 3 information flow lineages (as defined by Goonatilake in 1991): genetic (info in our DNA), neural-cultural (info experienced in our minds, enacted in the world, and expressed through speech/motion), and exosomatic (stored outside the body, either "recorded" - written/drawn - or "embedded" - animal trails/structures/tools). Bates adds a 4th: residue (trace information), which has been abandoned and is currently in the process of decay.
- The universe of living vs the universe of documentation. In the universe of documentation are knowledge, memory, and heritage - the information that is stored in  libraries, archives, museums.
- The information science discipline has several facets: Services/Functions, Subject Information, Institutions, Information Technology, Management/Policy, Geography, History

### Information & Society, Chapter 1 (Buckland 2017)

This book focuses on realistic information science, and is concerned with everyday human experience (i.e. human perception, social behavior, changing technologies, issues of trust). Chapter 1 focuses on documents and their role in the interpersonal relationships of our information society.
{: .notice--primary}

> “*Documents have become the connecting tissue that enables complex societies to function.* Documents have increasingly become the means for monitoring, influencing, and negotiating relationships with others.”

- The increasing dependence on (secondhand) knowledge of others is a result of: (1) increasing division of labor and (2) increasing reliance on communication/documentation for coordination
- Trust is paramount for us to function as a "document society"
- Key document example: passports

### What is a document? (Buckland 1997)

This article is essentially a literature review on how to define a document. “Document” no longer means just a “textual record” but could include other things as well. Many definitions are discussed from across disciplines - how wide/narrow should the definition be? How does digital technology change this?
{: .notice--primary}

- Specific people/theories discussed in the paper: (pulled from the subtitles)
	- Paul Otlet: Objects as documents
	- Suzanne Briet: Physical evidence as document
	- The antelope as a document
      - need to consider: materiality, intentionality, process, perception.

    > For example:  
		Object --- Document?  
		Star in sky -- No  
		Photo of star -- Yes  
		Stone in river -- No  
		Stone in museum -- Yes  
		Animal in wild -- No  
		Animal in zoo -- Yes  
    {: .small}

	- Donker Duyvis: A spiritual dimension to documents
	- Ranganathan: Micro-thought on a flat surface
	- Anthropology: Material culture
	- Semiotics: "Text" and "object-as-sign"
- A history of terms: Bibliography (19th century, the managing of documents) -> Documentation (early 20th century, referred to various information sciences working with physical objects) -> Information Science (second half of 20th century, incorporated digital information)

### As we may think (Bush 1945)

 Written just after he led the military's science division during WWII, in this essay (published in The Atlantic) Dr. Bush calls for scientists to keep moving forward with the science that was started (but not finished) by war, and rather than using inventions to extend the powers of the body, invent things that will extend the powers of the mind, and make use of/accessible the huge body of information humanity has collected.
 {: .notice--primary}

- Bush notes that machines can be used to outsource "non-creative" work/thought

> “A record if it is to be useful to science, must be continuously extended, it must be stored, and above all it must be consulted.”

 - Bush outlines many potential technological advances, and in the end puts them all together to form the "memex," a kind of precursor to the modern (internet connected) computer, utilizing cameras, microfilm, and projectors.

> “The world has arrived at an age of cheap complex devices of great reliability; and something is bound to come of it.”

- The human mind works by association, and any useful information index must also work by association (rather than artificial indexing into sub-classes).
- Bush theorizes of a new kind of encyclopedia using associative trails.

Sidenote: this dude is freakin' amazing. The fact that he did not live to see the internet is a tragedy - he basically came up with Wikipedia before computers even existed. Reading this article was like peering into the mind of a true visionary who was just so excited by information of all kinds. Respect. Hats off. Take a bow. Wow.
